Release k6 v0.41.0 (#2749)
grafana/k6: release notes/v0.41.0.md

> k6 v0.41.0 is here! :tada: It has relatively few user-facing changes, but includes massive internal improvements that pave the way for some awesome [features for the near future](#roadmap-and-future-plans). Unfortunately, this work also required us to make a few [minor breaking changes](#breaking-changes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
k6 v0.41.0 is here! :tada: It has relatively few user-facing changes, but includes massive internal improvements that pave the way for some awesome features for the near future. Unfortunately, this work also required us to make a few [minor breaking changes](#breaking-changes).
```

## Breaking changes

### Changes in the `url`, `iter` and `vu` system metric tags

> As we warned in the release notes for k6 [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.39.0.md#refactoring-metrics) and [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.40.0.md#refactoring-metrics), we've been fundamentally [refactoring the metrics sub-systems](#metric-time-series) of k6. We now have efficient support for time series, which required a few minor user-facing breaking changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we warned in the release notes for k6 [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/0556cd6e25971eefc7ab1ace79f744fa85c7aeb3/release%20notes/v0.41.0.md#roadmap-and-future-plans) and [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/2fe2dd32b3827eeeeb3959aff63a6b402aab0a5a/release%20notes/v0.40.0.md), we've been fundamentally [refactoring the metrics sub-systems](#metric-time-series) of k6. We now have efficient support for time series, which required a few minor user-facing breaking changes:
```
Should we use permalinks?

> As we warned in the release notes for k6 [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/0556cd6e25971eefc7ab1ace79f744fa85c7aeb3/release%20notes/v0.41.0.md#roadmap-and-future-plans) and [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/2fe2dd32b3827eeeeb3959aff63a6b402aab0a5a/release%20notes/v0.40.0.md), we've been fundamentally [refactoring the metrics sub-systems](#metric-time-series) of k6. We now have efficient support for time series, which required a few minor user-facing breaking changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we warned in the release notes for k6 [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/2fe2dd32b3827eeeeb3959aff63a6b402aab0a5a/release%20notes/v0.39.0.md#roadmap-and-future-plans) and [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/2fe2dd32b3827eeeeb3959aff63a6b402aab0a5a/release%20notes/v0.40.0.md#refactoring-metrics), we've been fundamentally [refactoring the metrics sub-systems](#metric-time-series) of k6. We now have efficient support for time series, which required a few minor user-facing breaking changes:
```
I did a mistake in the previous comment

We had a few minor changes in this release:

- [#2687](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2687) improved our logging tests. Thanks, @nsmith5!
- [#2696](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2696) updated the used Go version to 1.19.x and the Alpine version in our Docker image to 3.16. Thanks, @agilob!
- [#2707](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2707), [#2708](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2708), [#2709](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2709), [#2710](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2710) updated most of the Go dependencies k6 has.
- [#2716](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2716) refactored how custom JS tags are applied to metrics and cleaned up validation for invalid tag values.

As well as a couple of big improvements that will allow us to develop exciting new features soon:

### Metric time series ([#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594))

Previous to [#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594), k6 didn't have an efficient way to group together metric samples that had the same tags. This meant that a whole class of applications for processing and aggregating metrics were nearly impossible to do or, at best, very inefficient.

> At the cost of some minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes), we now have a performant internal representation to group together metric samples with the same tags at the time of the action that generated them, i.e. the time of metric measurement. This allows us to efficiently group together samples for the same action (e.g. an HTTP request to a specific URL) over time and construct time series with them.

Reviewer: Just spot as a reminder, as said in private it would be good to have this under the breaking change section.

Author: Resolved by https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2749/commits/f58cf242e3959e9c6b27151b0f45c455bb6bce35?

Reviewer: LGTM

> k6 v0.41.0 is here! :tada: It has relatively few user-facing changes, but includes massive internal improvements that will pave the way [for some awesome features](#roadmap-and-future-plans) in the near future. Unfortunately, we also had to make a few [minor breaking changes](#breaking-changes) to allow us to do that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
k6 v0.41.0 is here! :tada: It has relatively few user-facing changes, but includes massive internal improvements that pave the way for some awesome [features for the near future](#roadmap-and-future-plans). Unfortunately, we also had to make a few [minor breaking changes](#breaking-changes) to allow us to do that.
```

## Breaking changes

### Changes in the `url`, `iter` and `vu` system metric tags

> As we warned in both the k6 [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.39.0.md#refactoring-metrics) and [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.40.0.md#refactoring-metrics) release notes, we have been fundamentally [refactoring the metrics sub-systems](#metric-time-series) of k6. We now have efficient support for time series and that required a few minor user-facing breaking changes:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As we warned in both the k6 [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.39.0.md#refactoring-metrics) and [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.40.0.md#refactoring-metrics) release notes, we have been fundamentally [refactoring the metrics sub-systems](#metric-time-series) of k6. We now have efficient support for time series, and that required a few minor user-facing breaking changes:
```

> As we warned in both the k6 [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.39.0.md#refactoring-metrics) and [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.40.0.md#refactoring-metrics) release notes, we have been fundamentally [refactoring the metrics sub-systems](#metric-time-series) of k6. We now have efficient support for time series, and that required a few minor user-facing breaking changes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we warned in the release notes for k6 [v0.39.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.39.0.md#refactoring-metrics) and [v0.40.0](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/master/release%20notes/v0.40.0.md#refactoring-metrics), we've been fundamentally [refactoring the metrics sub-systems](#metric-time-series) of k6. We now have efficient support for time series, which required a few minor user-facing breaking changes:
```

> 1. If [URL grouping](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/http-requests/#url-grouping) is used for HTTP requests (that is, if the `name` tag is somehow specified), then the `url` tag in the resulting `http_req_*` metric samples will also have the same value as the `name` tag. Previously this was done only for [the `cloud` output](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/cloud/), but now it will be done universally ([#2703](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2703)).

Reviewer 4: Nit: this also happens when [`http.url`](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-http/urlurl) is used. Which in practice sets the `name` but looks slightly nicer (for simple cases as well).

Author: Resolved with the [latest force-push](https://github.com/grafana/k6/compare/0b6ec90828afac81746a6d300c878006c57b5ac7..f68483e91bdb7c70579acea6ada26a549c7a6e6e)

> 1. If [URL grouping](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/http-requests/#url-grouping) is used for HTTP requests (that is, if the `name` tag is somehow specified), then the `url` tag in the resulting `http_req_*` metric samples will also have the same value as the `name` tag. Previously this was done only for [the `cloud` output](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/cloud/), but now it will be done universally ([#2703](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2703)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If [URL grouping](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/http-requests/#url-grouping) is used for HTTP requests (that is, if the `name` tag is specified), then the `url` tag in the resulting `http_req_*` metric samples will also have the same value as the `name` tag. Previously, k6 did this only for [the `cloud` output](https://k6.io/docs/results-output/real-time/cloud/), but now it does this universally ([#2703](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2703)).
```

> 2. The [`vu` and `iter` system tags](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/tags-and-groups/#system-tags), which are disabled by default, have been transformed into [high-cardinality metrics metadata](#internal-support-for-high-cardinality-metrics-metadata) instead. This means that they will no longer be usable in thresholds and various outputs may emit them differently or ignore them completely ([#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. The [`vu` and `iter` system tags](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/tags-and-groups/#system-tags), which are disabled by default, have been transformed into [high-cardinality metrics metadata](#internal-support-for-high-cardinality-metrics-metadata) instead. It means that they will no longer be usable in thresholds, and various outputs may emit them differently or ignore them completely ([#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726)).
```

> 2. The [`vu` and `iter` system tags](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/tags-and-groups/#system-tags), which are disabled by default, have been transformed into [high-cardinality metrics metadata](#internal-support-for-high-cardinality-metrics-metadata) instead. It means that they will no longer be usable in thresholds, and various outputs may emit them differently or ignore them completely ([#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The [`vu` and `iter` system tags](https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/tags-and-groups/#system-tags), which are disabled by default, have been transformed into [high-cardinality metrics metadata](#internal-support-for-high-cardinality-metrics-metadata) instead. It means that they will no longer be usable in thresholds, and various outputs may emit them differently or ignore them completely ([#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726)).
```

### Changes in the Go metrics APIs

> While the user-facing changes from our metrics refactoring are few and relatively minor, and there are no changes to JavaScript APIs yet, we have extensively refactored our internal Go APIs ([#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594), [#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726), [#2727](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2727)). The [`metrics.Sample`](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/sample.go#L11-L33) and [`metrics.TagSet`](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/tags.go#L16-L157) types are now entirely different. We also have high-cardinality metadata attributes in each sample and at the VU level (see [here](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/tags.go#L159-L231) and [here](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/lib/vu_state.go#L83-L119)).

Reviewer 2: "Here" as link text doesn't say anything about what it takes the reader to, and it's inaccessible for screen readers / crawlers. If I understand, this parenthetical also refers to two different pieces.

I'd split it. Something like this:

> We also have high-cardinality metadata attributes in [each sample](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/tags.go#L159-L231) and at the [VU level](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/lib/vu_state.go#L83-L119).

I'm not putting that edit in myself though, because I'm not sure. You could also write the link as "code", to give a hint about where the reader would go.

> ...in each sample ([code](code)) and VU level ([code]).

Author: Resolved with the [latest force-push](https://github.com/grafana/k6/compare/0b6ec90828afac81746a6d300c878006c57b5ac7..f68483e91bdb7c70579acea6ada26a549c7a6e6e)

> While the user-facing changes from our metrics refactoring are few and relatively minor, and there are no changes to JavaScript APIs yet, we have extensively refactored our internal Go APIs ([#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594), [#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726), [#2727](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2727)). The [`metrics.Sample`](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/sample.go#L11-L33) and [`metrics.TagSet`](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/tags.go#L16-L157) types are now completely different. We also have high-cardinality metadata attributes in each sample and at the VU level (see [here](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/tags.go#L159-L231) and [here](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/lib/vu_state.go#L83-L119)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the user-facing changes from our metrics refactoring are few and relatively minor, and there are no changes to JavaScript APIs yet, we have extensively refactored our internal Go APIs ([#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594), [#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726), [#2727](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2727)). The [`metrics.Sample`](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/sample.go#L11-L33) and [`metrics.TagSet`](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/tags.go#L16-L157) types are now entirely different. We also have high-cardinality metadata attributes in each sample and at the VU level (see [here](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/metrics/tags.go#L159-L231) and [here](https://github.com/grafana/k6/blob/8a74171c8b43f48fb53078e0bcfa7851828124bc/lib/vu_state.go#L83-L119)).
```

### `k6 convert` is officially deprecated ([#2714](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2714))

> `k6 convert` has been a sub-command allowing users to convert a [HAR file recording](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HAR_(file_format)) of HTTP traffic into a preliminary k6 script making roughly the same requests. It has been long neglected and softly deprecated in favor of the newer and more feature-rich [har-to-k6 standalone converter](https://github.com/grafana/har-to-k6).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`k6 convert` has been a sub-command to convert a [HAR file recording](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HAR_(file_format)) of HTTP traffic into a preliminary k6 script that makes roughly the same requests. It has been long neglected and softly deprecated in favor of the newer and more feature-rich [har-to-k6 standalone converter](https://github.com/grafana/har-to-k6).
```

> `k6 convert` has been a sub-command that allows users to convert a [HAR file recording](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HAR_(file_format)) of HTTP traffic into a preliminary k6 script that makes roughly the same requests. It has been neglected for a long while and softly deprecated in favor of the newer and more feature-rich [har-to-k6 standalone converter](https://github.com/grafana/har-to-k6).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`k6 convert` has been a sub-command allowing users to convert a [HAR file recording](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HAR_(file_format)) of HTTP traffic into a preliminary k6 script making roughly the same requests. It has been long neglected and softly deprecated in favor of the newer and more feature-rich [har-to-k6 standalone converter](https://github.com/grafana/har-to-k6).
```

> We have now officially deprecated `k6 convert`. The command still works, and it will continue to do so for a few more k6 versions. However, it's not visible from `k6 --help` and will emit a warning when used. Please see the [documentation for the standalone har-to-k6 converter](https://k6.io/docs/test-authoring/recording-a-session/har-converter/) and [open an issue](https://github.com/grafana/har-to-k6/issues) (or comment in an existing one) if you have any problems with it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have now officially deprecated `k6 convert`. The command still works and will continue to do so for a few more k6 versions. However, it's not visible from `k6 --help` and will emit a warning when used. Please see the [documentation for the standalone har-to-k6 converter](https://k6.io/docs/test-authoring/recording-a-session/har-converter/) and [open an issue](https://github.com/grafana/har-to-k6/issues) (or comment on an existing one) if you have any problems with it.
```

> ## New Features, enhancements and UX improvements

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## New Features, enhancements, and UX improvements
```

- [#2679](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2679) added support for `maxReceiveSize` and `maxSendSize` parameters in the [gRPC's `Client.connect()` method](https://k6.io/docs/javascript-api/k6-net-grpc/client/client-connect/). Thanks, @ariasmn!
- [#2605](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2605) introduced a new `--exclude-env-vars` CLI flag to [`k6 archive`](https://k6.io/docs/misc/archive-command/) that causes it to not include the provided environment variables in the resulting archive bundle's `metadata.json` file.
- [#2700](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/2700) added support for loading gRPC protoset files. Thanks, @jklipp!

## Bug fixes

- [#2678](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2678) fixed the Docker image labels. Thanks, @knittl, for reporting the problem ([#2677](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/2677))!
- [#2689](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2689) fixed the REST API's `Content-Type` response header. Thanks, @wingyplus!
- [#2691](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2691) fixed the detailed `k6 version` information embedded in the k6 releases.

> - [#2693](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2693) fixed a bug in the k6 event loop when a Promise rejection was left unhandled.

Reviewer 4: nit: "a bug" being the event loop stop being usable after this for that VU :sweat:

Author: do you think I should mention this detail in the release notes? :thinking:

Author: Resolved with the [latest force-push](https://github.com/grafana/k6/compare/0b6ec90828afac81746a6d300c878006c57b5ac7..f68483e91bdb7c70579acea6ada26a549c7a6e6e)

> - [#2693](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2693) fixed a big in the k6 event loop when a Promise rejection was left unhandled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [#2693](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2693) fixed a bug in the k6 event loop when a Promise rejection was left unhandled.
```

- [#2696](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2696) fixed a problem with HTTP redirects with empty `Location` headers ([#2474](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/2474)) by updating the Go version we use to compile k6 to 1.19.x. Thanks, @agilob!
- [#2705](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2705) fixed a panic in the `k6/net/grpc` module ([#2661](https://github.com/grafana/k6/issues/2661)). Thanks, @c47gao and @robpickerill!

> - [#2738](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2738) fixed a panic when a Promise was rejected with an `undefined` reason.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [#2738](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2738) fixed a panic when a Promise was rejected for an `undefined` reason.
```

Author: It is "reject with", see https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/reject

Reviewer 3: Strictly grammatically speaking, both are possible, but in this context, you're right, my bad 👍🏻

- [#2739](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2739) fixed hidden stack traces in certain types of errors originating from k6's Go code.

## Maintenance and internal improvements

We had a few minor changes in this release:

- [#2687](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2687) improved our logging tests. Thanks, @nsmith5!
- [#2696](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2696) updated the used Go version to 1.19.x and the Alpine version in our Docker image to 3.16. Thanks, @agilob!
- [#2707](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2707), [#2708](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2708), [#2709](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2709), [#2710](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2710) updated most of the Go dependencies k6 has.
- [#2716](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2716) refactored how custom JS tags are applied to metrics and cleaned up validation for invalid tag values.

> As well as a couple of significant improvements that will allow us to develop exciting new features soon:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also have a couple of significant improvements that will help us develop exciting new features soon:
```

> As well as a couple of big improvements that will allow us to develop exciting new features soon:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As well as a couple of significant improvements that will allow us to develop exciting new features soon:
```

### Metric time series ([#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594))

> Previous to [#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594), k6 didn't have an efficient way to group together metric samples that had the same tags. This meant that a whole class of applications for processing and aggregating metrics were nearly impossible to do or, at best, very inefficient.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Previous to [#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594), k6 didn't have an efficient way to group metric samples with the same tags. It meant that a whole class of applications for processing and aggregating metrics were nearly impossible to do or, at best, very inefficient.
```

> At the cost of some minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes), we now have a performant internal representation to group metric samples with the same tags at the time of the action that generated them, i.e. the time of metric measurement. It allows us to efficiently group samples for the same action (e.g. an HTTP request to a specific URL) over time and construct time series with them.

Reviewer 4: I feel like this likely needs more information on what that means for the future possibilities. Even if we don't intend on currently pursuing all of them.

Author: Sure, but I think it should be in the "Roadmap and future plans" section, not here

Author: Resolved with the [latest force-push](https://github.com/grafana/k6/compare/0b6ec90828afac81746a6d300c878006c57b5ac7..f68483e91bdb7c70579acea6ada26a549c7a6e6e)?

> At the cost of some minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes), we now have a performant internal representation to group metric samples with the same tags at the time of the action that generated them, i.e. the time of metric measurement. It allows us to efficiently group samples for the same action (e.g. an HTTP request to a specific URL) over time and construct time series with them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the cost of some minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes), we now have a performant internal representation to group metric samples with the same tags at the time of the action that generated them, i.e. the time of metric measurement. With this, k6 can efficiently group samples for the same action (e.g. an HTTP request to a specific URL) over time and construct time series with them.
```

> At the cost of some minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes), we now have a performant internal representation to group together metric samples with the same tags at the time of the action that generated them, i.e. the time of metric measurement. This allows us to efficiently group together samples for the same action (e.g. an HTTP request to a specific URL) over time and construct time series with them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the cost of some minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes), we now have a performant internal representation to group metric samples with the same tags at the time of the action that generated them, i.e. the time of metric measurement. It allows us to efficiently group samples for the same action (e.g. an HTTP request to a specific URL) over time and construct time series with them.
```

### Internal support for high-cardinality metrics metadata ([#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726), [#2727](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2727))

> Besides the previously described efficient grouping of metric samples into time-series, which are meant for relatively low-cardinality data, k6 needed some way to attach high-cardinality metadata as well. This is necessary for data like unique or random identifiers, e.g. Trace and Span IDs (in distributed tracing), user IDs (e.g. in tests with huge data sets), etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Besides the previously described efficient grouping of metric samples into time series, which are meant for relatively low-cardinality data, k6 needed some way to attach high-cardinality metadata as well. This is necessary for data like unique or random identifiers, e.g. Trace and Span IDs (in distributed tracing), user IDs (e.g. in tests with huge data sets), etc.
```

> This has been added in k6 v0.41.0, and the `vu` and `iter` system tags have been transformed into metadata (see the [breaking changes section](#breaking-changes) above), but it is not yet accessible from user scripts. There is no JavaScript API to modify these metadata, only built-in k6 Go modules and [xk6](https://github.com/grafana/xk6) Go extensions can make use of it, for now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This has been added in k6 v0.41.0, and the `vu` and `iter` system tags have been transformed into metadata (see the [breaking changes section](#breaking-changes) above), but it is not yet accessible from user scripts. There is no JavaScript API to modify this metadata, only built-in k6 Go modules and [xk6](https://github.com/grafana/xk6) Go extensions can make use of it&mdash;for now.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe the dash can add a little moment of suspense.

Author: But it makes the text more unreadable in markdown, so I'd prefer a comma or a normal dash, or just using "—" directly.

```suggestion
This has been added in k6 v0.41.0, and the `vu` and `iter` system tags have been transformed into metadata (see the [breaking changes section](#breaking-changes) above), but it is not yet accessible from user scripts. There is no JavaScript API to modify this metadata, only built-in k6 Go modules and [xk6](https://github.com/grafana/xk6) Go extensions can make use of it, for now.
```

> k6 v0.41.0 is here! :tada: It has relatively few user-facing changes, but includes massive internal improvements that pave the way for some awesome [features for the near future](#roadmap-and-future-plans). Unfortunately, we also had to make a few [minor breaking changes](#breaking-changes) to allow us to do that.

Reviewer 2: The original sentence sounded awkward to my ear.

- [#2716](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2716) refactored how custom JS tags are applied to metrics and cleaned up validation for invalid tag values.

We also have a couple of significant improvements that will help us develop exciting new features soon:

### Metric time series ([#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594))

Previous to [#2594](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2594), k6 didn't have an efficient way to group metric samples with the same tags. It meant that a whole class of applications for processing and aggregating metrics were nearly impossible to do or, at best, very inefficient.

At the cost of some minor [breaking changes](#breaking-changes), we now have a performant internal representation to group metric samples with the same tags at the time of the action that generated them, i.e. the time of metric measurement. With this, k6 can efficiently group samples for the same action (e.g. an HTTP request to a specific URL) over time and construct time series with them.

### Internal support for high-cardinality metrics metadata ([#2726](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2726), [#2727](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/2727))

> Besides the previously described efficient grouping of metric samples into time series, which are meant for relatively low-cardinality data, k6 needed some way to attach high-cardinality metadata as well. This is necessary for data like unique or random identifiers, e.g. Trace and Span IDs (in distributed tracing), user IDs (e.g. in tests with huge data sets), etc.

Reviewer 2: I made a small assumption about what high-cardinality is here. Please confirm that everything is correct..

> Besides the previously described efficient grouping of metric samples into time series, which are meant for relatively low-cardinality data, k6 needed some way to attach high-cardinality metadata as well. This is necessary for data like unique or random identifiers, e.g. Trace and Span IDs (in distributed tracing), user IDs (e.g. in tests with huge data sets), etc.

Author: "helps with relatively low-cardinality data" is not quite correct, "works well for relatively low-cardinality data" is more appropriate
```suggestion
As described in the previous section, the efficient grouping of metric samples into time series works well for relatively low-cardinality data. However, k6 needed some way to attach high-cardinality metadata as well. This is necessary for data that's unique or random, such as Trace and Span IDs in distributed tracing or user IDs in tests with huge data sets.
```

> This has been added in k6 v0.41.0, and the `vu` and `iter` system tags have been transformed into metadata (see the [breaking changes section](#breaking-changes) above), but it is not yet accessible from user scripts. There is no JavaScript API to modify this metadata, only built-in k6 Go modules and [xk6](https://github.com/grafana/xk6) Go extensions can make use of it, for now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
k6 v0.41.0 has added this high-cardinality metadata, and the `vu` and `iter` system tags have been transformed into metadata (see the [breaking changes section](#breaking-changes) above), but it is not yet accessible from user scripts. There is no JavaScript API to modify this metadata, only built-in k6 Go modules and [xk6](https://github.com/grafana/xk6) Go extensions can make use of it, for now.
```

Author: ```suggestion
k6 v0.41.0 has added support for attaching high-cardinality metadata to metric samples, and the `vu` and `iter` system tags have been transformed into such metadata (see the [breaking changes section](#breaking-changes) above), but it is not yet accessible from user scripts. There is no JavaScript API to modify this metadata, only built-in k6 Go modules and [xk6](https://github.com/grafana/xk6) Go extensions can make use of it, for now.
```

## Roadmap and future plans

### Prometheus remote-write output

Because big parts of our planned metrics refactoring have been merged, we'll finally be able to refactor and improve the [Prometheus remote-write output extension](https://github.com/grafana/xk6-output-prometheus-remote/). Our goal is to make it more efficient, polish its rough edges, and merge it into the k6 core as a built-in output module in the near future.

### Tracing support via high-cardinality metrics metadata

> We now support attaching high-cardinality metadata to metric samples, though only from Go code, for now. We plan to expose this functionality via JavaScript APIs as well, so we will be able to [attach unique trace and span IDs](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-httpx/issues/9) to every metric measurement from JS code, without negatively affecting other parts of k6.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We now support attaching high-cardinality metadata to metric samples, though only from Go code for now. We plan to expose this functionality via the JavaScript APIs as well, so we will be able to [attach unique trace and span IDs](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-httpx/issues/9) to every metric measurement from JS code without negatively affecting other parts of k6.
```

Author: This whole section got dropped, since it's not certain if the JS APIs will make it in k6 v0.42.0 and we didn't want to over-promise :disappointed:
